So, guys, now let us try to understand how timer works, that is how operating system implements the
concept of timers.
So Timer works in the context of separate code flow, which could be a separate thread or a separate
process altogether.
So now just try to understand this with the help of this diagram.
Suppose you have written some application B which is running on your machine.
In this application, you have some function fule, which accept some argument, right, and dysfunction
to some piece of work mainly presumes your actual application, which is running and executing its logic.
Right.
Suppose at some point of time here your application launches a new timer.
So let us suppose that new time, a launch is some hypothetical API with your application uses in order
to start a new timer.
Right.
Now, note that your application starts a timer because your application wants to do some unit of work
when the timer expires, right.
That unit of work, which is done as a result of timer expiration, is represented by this function
for.
Right.
So whenever we create a timer, one of the mandatory argument that we need to pass is the function pointer.
This function pointer represents a function which will be executed when your timer expires.
Right.
And it is obvious that if you are invoking the function, then you need to pass some argument to this
function.
So for each timer, you have to pause at least two things.
The first is the unit of work which the timer will execute when it fires.
That unit of work is represented by this function foo.
And the second argument is the argument, which will be parsed as an argument to this function for right.
So as soon as this API is invoked, your process P would continue to execute the subsequent lines of
code, whereas your operating system will fork out a new thread at this line of code.
Right.
And it will create a separate code flow in the form of a new thread T1.
So this block represents a new thread, Daewon, all together, which is created by the parent process
B.
Now, let us suppose that this API created a trad. with expiration time equal to five seconds.
So as soon as the process we had forked out this thread, right, in order to create a timer, this
thread will not execute and it will stay blocked.
Right.
The operating system will keep this thread in the blog to state, whereas are Process B can execute
whatever it wants after the API new time Alonzo has returned.
This is how thread -- works, right?
Your parent process continues its execution flow.
Now, since the expiration time of this timer was set to five seconds, it means that after only five
seconds has elapsed, the operating system will then invoke a function fool with the argument energy,
which was specified here right now, function fuq and execute whatever logic it had.
So you can see this is how timer works.
The function fully represents the unit of work, which we need to do when the timer fires.
Right.
So the function will be triggered only after five seconds has elapsed after the API new timer launch
was invoked.
So when Fool has completed its execution in the context of the timer, Trad. timer is turned off.
When I say that the timer is turned off, it means that the timer triad is killed by the colonel or
operating system.
So as soon as this function completes its execution and returns, the timer traps, T1 is automatically
killed by the colonel or operating system because the unit of work which was supposed to be done by
the timer, has completed.
Application B, that is the process B should free all the resources that were occupied by Taimur in
the end of a full function only.
Right now it might be possible that in order to prepare this argument, your application must have Marlock
certain data structures.
Right.
And those data structures were passed as an argument to this dimer function fool.
So it is your responsibility to free these data structures at the end of this function, right?
Just before the timer function has completed its work, it should free all the resources.
Don't worry, we will going to implement all this logic.
And I will show you with the help of an example how to do that.
So the function fule in technical term is called a timer callback.
The mechanics that we discussed here regarding how timers are implemented by the operating system applies
to all types of Taimur.
That is one short timer.
Periodic timer are exponential backoff timer.
In case of one short timer, once the function fully completes its execution, the kernel or operating
system kills the 31 right.
Whereas in case of periodic timer, once the function fully completes its execution.
The operating system puts the 381 in the block to state again.
Right.
And after again, five seconds has elapsed.
Then again, the function is called and the cycle repeats for forever.
And in case of exponential backoff, timer, once the function foo has completed its execution, the
operating system again put the timer 381 in the block to state, right.
But instead of now waiting for five seconds, we will wait for 10 seconds, right, and only after 10
seconds has elapsed, then only the timer callback is invoked again when the timer callback finishes
its execution.
The operating system will put the timer T1 in the blocked state again, and this time it will wait for
time.
T is equal to 20 seconds, right?
So every time the waiting timer will be doubled of the previous time.
So you can see that the fundamentals for implementing Munchak periodic and exponential backoff timer
are no different.